# What is .NET?

https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/dotnet/what-is-dotnet

.NET is an open source developer platform, created by Microsoft, for building many different types of applications.

## .NET

.NET is a free, cross-platform, open source developer platform for building many different types of applications.

With .NET, you can use multiple languages, editors, and libraries to build for web, mobile, desktop, games, IoT, and more.

- .NET CORE (runs anywhere!) Windows, Linux and MacOS/
- .NET FRAMEWORK: websites, services, and apps on Windows.
- Xamarin/Mono: a .NET for mobile
- .NET Standard the shared set of libraries for the above.


# .NET CRL Basics

### Common Language Runtime (CLR) overview

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/clr

.NET provides a run-time environment called the common language runtime that runs the code and provides services that make the development process easier.

Compilers and tools expose the cOmmon language runtime's functionality and enable you to write code that benefits from the managed execution enviroment.

```
Languages (VB, C#, C++, Any Other) --> 
Compiler -->
IL CODE  (Intermediate Language) --> 
CLR (Common Language Runtime) -->  
(JIT) Just In Time Compilation --> 
Native  Code -->
Operating System Services 
```

## C# Language

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/clr

## Essential .NET libraries and types 

### .NET class library overview

.NET APIs include classes, interfaces, delegates, and value types that expedite and optimize the development process and provide access to system functionality. To facilitate interoperability between languages, most .NET types are CLS-compliant and can therefore be used from any programming language whose compiler conforms to the common language specification (CLS).

.NET types are the foundation on which .NET applications, components, and controls are built. .NET includes types that perform the following functions:

- Represent base data types and exceptions.
- Encapsulate data structures.
- Perform I/O.
- Access information about loaded types.
- Invoke .NET security checks.
- Provide data access, rich client-side GUI, and server-controlled, client-side GUI.


### Naming conventions

.NET types use a dot syntax naming scheme that connotes a hierarchy. This technique groups related types into namespaces so they can be searched and referenced more easily. The first part of the full name—up to the rightmost dot—is the namespace name. The last part of the name is the type name. For example, ```System.Collections.Generic.List<T>``` represents the ```List<T> ```type, which belongs to the System.Collections.Generic namespace. The types in ```System.Collections.Generic``` can be used to work with generic collections.

Library developers are expected to use the following convention when creating names for their namespaces:

```CompanyName.TechnologyName```

### System namespace

The System namespace is the root namespace for fundamental types in .NET. This namespace includes classes that represent the base data types used by all applications, for example, ```Object``` (the root of the inheritance hierarchy), ```Byte```, ```Char```, ```Array```, ```Int32```, and ```String```. Many of these types correspond to the primitive data types that your programming language uses. When you write code using .NET types, you can use your language's corresponding keyword when a .NET base data type is expected.

### Data structures

.NET includes a set of data structures that are the workhorses of many .NET apps. These are mostly collections, but also include other types.

- ```Array``` - Represents an array of strongly typed objects that can be accessed by index. Has a fixed size, per its construction.
- ```List<T>``` - Represents a strongly typed list of objects that can be accessed by index. Is automatically resized as needed.
- ```Dictionary<TKey,TValue>``` - Represents a collection of values that are indexed by a key. Values can be accessed via key. Is automatically resized as needed.
- ```Uri``` - Provides an object representation of a uniform resource identifier (URI) and easy access to the parts of the URI.
- ```DateTime``` - Represents an instant in time, typically expressed as a date and time of day.

### Utility APIs
.NET includes a set of utility APIs that provide functionality for many important tasks.

- ```HttpClient``` - An API for sending HTTP requests and receiving HTTP responses from a resource identified by a URI.
- ```XDocument``` - An API for loading and querying XML documents with LINQ.
- ```StreamReader``` - An API for reading files.
- ```StreamWriter``` - An API for writing files.

